(excerpt from sci-fi short story, 1446 words)

Unlike the hallways we had arrived from, the room was not abandoned. Shelves—like those in the hallways—filled the walls with boxes, crates, and appliances. A paper-filled desk disrupted the path between the room’s two doors.

My backpack and hoverboard rested beside the shelf we had descended, along with Ágdá’s bag and the grate I’d kicked free.

I climbed onto a chair by the desk, peering at a map laying atop it. It showed the station. Our station. There, the Shipyard, with its bays and rings. The Spine. The Burrow itself, with circles around several community silos. Dangerous lines passed deeper into the moon, toward its core, further back in time.

I nibbled at the flaking scales on my hand while looking at my home through an outsider’s eyes.

“Ágdá, can you read this?”

She joined me on the chair, one knee resting on the desk itself.

Beneath the map, more diagrams. Ship bays circled and annotated. Papers filled with ink. Routes through Silo 3. Routes through my home.

“No, I can’t read it,” she said, “Though I recognize the characters.” Ágdá paused.

“The War?” My stomach tightened.

Her shoulders sank. She nodded.

I hopped off the chair, away from the desk. “What is all this doing here?” My eyes scanned the shelves. This took effort: to haul in, arrange, and hide. “And why use paper? That just makes it harder for—”

“—for Adena to find.” Ágdá joined me back on the floor. “They don’t want the station to know, to find whispers of their work in the data streams.”

I rubbed my molting scales, arms crossed to let me massage each arm at once. “Should we tell someone?”

Ágdá opened her mouth to respond, but then we both felt it. Up my cheeks, along the sides of my face.

Electricity.
Life.
Someone’s coming.

I shut my eyes to sharpen my ears.

No voices. No approaching steps. Not yet.

Ágdá grabbed her bag and rushed for the shelves to the vent. I adjusted the chair and tidied the maps, then joined her, grabbing my backpack and board.

A faint mumble emerged from behind the left door. My electroreceptors revealed the large biomass headed our way, enough for at least six Kihû. Or three humans.

I passed Ágdá—now in the vent—my hoverboard. She stashed it as her side, then reached for my bag.

“Which way do we go?” I whispered as I crawled into the vent.

She had jammed her arms underneath her, hugging herself. My heartbeat echoed in the vent.

“They’ll hear us if we go back,” she hissed.

“They’ll hear us if we move at all,” I replied.

“Did you grab the grate?”

We each stared at the other in the green dim.

The door that had blocked us shook as someone worked the lock on the far side. Muffled voices continued their conversation.

I peeked down. The grate was on the floor, leaning against the wall.
*Maybe they won’t notice.*

The door swung inward, causing us each to flinch. The blue-white glow of an electric light flooded the room below us.

We held our breaths.

“Finally,” said a woman’s voice. Too deep to be Kihû.

Footsteps entered the room. Grunts preceded a clank as someone put something heavy on the floor.

“Get a cart next time,” said the woman.

“Not that heavy,” said a man.

Closer now, and without the door and distance to interfere, the group’s bioelectric signals resolved.

Two humans and a Kihû.
And a Kihû

I looked over at Ágdá, whose wide eyes told me she had realized the same thing.

*We can’t hide from a Kihû.*

The door clicked shut and the three bodies met at the desk with the maps. One human took the chair, while the other human and the Kihû—after grabbing a stool from a shelf—stood next to each other opposite the seated individual.

“Ok, now we can talk without the station hearing,” said the woman. “Nokelfod, how are you settling in? Any issues with your residence?”

“No, thank you. The place is fine. I’m not looking forward to living in the damp, but I’ve had far worse assignments than Silo 3.”

The life in the humans buzzed and bubbled. They were relaxed. The Kihû’s bioelectricity settled, flat and sturdy, like a pool of water waiting for someone to throw a rock in.

“You’ll get used to the damp and the dim. It grows on you after a couple of months. And you, how are the residence permits coming along?”

A ripple in the Kihû’s pool. “I wiped two more. Adena has protocols buried in protocols. Washing the permits is slow, but not dangerous.”

“Pick up the pace, we’ll need more before—”

“Wait,” said the man, “wasn’t there a grate on that vent?”

My heart jumped. I stifled a yelp.

The bioelectricity in the room below sizzled and snapped as the occupants scrambled about.

“Light off,” said the woman.

Click. The electric lamp went out.

“There’s a green glow coming from the vent!” said the human Nokelfod.

*What do I do? What do I do?*

Ágdá sat motionless in the vent that led back to the shelf we had entered through. I had ended up across from her, a metal fan behind me blocking escape in that direction. To my right, the vent extended several meters before bending upward into a vertical shaft.

My scales ached as I raced through options. Dive for the vertical shaft and hope it led to safety. Wait here and hope we stay hidden. Jump out and surprise them, then escape in the confusion. Every choice ended poorly.

“What do we do?” Ágdá mouthed the words from across the open gap between us. Any movement would make noise as the vent strained against our unplanned weight. I gestured to the vertical shaft with my eyes. “Over there?”

“Lizard, you can fit through that hole, right? Investigate.” The woman’s voice was a focused whisper.

I glared at the glowing green blob on the hoverboard beside Ágdá, wishing the tiny creatures inside had gone dark sooner, that I had not agitated them back into brightness, that I was not here, stuck in a vent. My muscles tensed. I wanted to move, to go somewhere, anywhere, but couldn’t. My knees and elbows turned chill and heavy, as if locked in ice blocks.

Ágdá’s eyes shined. When she squished them shut, tears slid out from each.

Beneath us, the Kihû clambered up the same shelving unit we had used moments ago. A flashlight flicked on, far brighter than the dimming light of my glow-blob. The blue-white light washed out my vision. I shrunk my head back into my neck, shutting my eyes tight.

*—get away get away get away—*

The flashlight passed over my eyelids, a warm beam that scattered my thoughts. The intruder’s bioelectric presence filled the space in front of me, trapping me in the vent. As I tried to withdraw further into my shoulders, the light departed.

I peeked open an eye. My retina adjusted.

Not a half-meter from my face, a head covered in red-violet scales poked through the grate hole.

*Teacher Kaysh?*

He held the flashlight in one arm, pointing it toward the vertical shaft, while the other arm extended into the vent beside Ágdá, the creamy-white skin of its underside coated in dust. I opened my mouth to speak, but my teacher’s eyes grew wide. His subtle head shake kept me quiet. My teacher turned his head toward Ágdá—her lips drawn in as tight as she could muster—and with his free hand, plucked the glow-blob from the hoverboard and lowered it back through the grate.

He tilted his head down enough to talk to the two humans below.

“There was someone up here; they left this behind. I’m going to check for anything else.”

Kaysh brought his eyes up and met mine. “Don’t move,” he mouthed, before turning to Ágdá. 

Then he lowered himself out of the vent. “Hand me the grate. I’ll reinstall it while I’m up here,” he said as if the vents were empty.

The thin lines of the grate appeared in the hole as Kaysh reattached it to the vent, blocking most of the light and leaving us in near-total darkness.

I looked toward Ágdá’s silhouette, trying to mimic her stillness.

Beneath us, commotion. Hurried, urgent whispers. The ruckus of a secretive labor.

My muscles tightened. I stayed still, lying on my stomach, unwilling to stretch so much as a toe. My molting scales burned, but the itch faded with time. 

So, too, did the remaining light from below.